Add new gall guide. (#1249)
urbit/urbit.org: content/docs/userspace/gall-guide/intro.md

+++
title = "Introduction"
weight = 1
template = "doc.html"
+++

This guide will walk through everything you need to know to write your own Gall
agents.

The Gall Guide is suitable for anyone with an intermediate knowledge of Hoon. If
you've worked through [Hoon School](/docs/hoon/hoon-school/intro) or something
equivalent, you should be fine.

## What are Gall agents?

Gall is one of the eight vanes (kernel modules) of Arvo, Urbit's operating
system. Gall's purpose is to manage userspace applications called _agents_.

An agent is a piece of software that is primarily focused on maintaining and
distributing a piece of state with a defined structure. It exposes an interface
that lets programs read, subscribe to, and manipulate the state. Every event

> happens in an atomic transaction, so the state is never inconsistent. Since the

Reviewer: > never inconsistent

I mean, the developer can still get parts of the state out of sync with each other, etc. I think this is really trying to say that the agent is never left in an "in-between state", events either get processed fully or they don't, but not sure if there's an elegant way to say that without disrupting flow here. (Also maybe this is just being pedantic!)

state is permanent, when the agent is upgraded with a change to the structure of
the state, the developer provides a migration function from the old state type
to the new state type.

It's not too far off to think of an agent as simply a database with
developer-defined logic. But an agent is significantly less constrained than a
database. Databases are usually tightly constrained in one or more ways because
they need to provide certain guarantees (like atomicity) or optimizations (like

> indexes). Urbit is a single-level store, so atomicity comes for free. Many

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
indexes). Arvo is a [single-level store](/docs/arvo/overview#single-level-store), so atomicity comes for free. Many
```
Does atomicity actually follow from being a SLS? I am very much a novice about this kind of stuff, so maybe I have the wrong mental model, but its not obvious to me and I couldn't find a reference for this with a quick google.

applications don't use databases because they need relational indices; rather,
they use them for their guarantees around persistence. Some do need the indices,
though, and it's not hard to imagine an agent which provides a SQL-like
interface.

On the other hand, an agent is also a lot like what many systems call a
"service". An agent is permanent and addressable -- a running program can talk

> to an agent just by naming it. An agent can perform IO, unlike most databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to an agent just by naming it. An agent can perform [IO](/blog/io-in-hoon), unlike most databases.
```

This is a critical part of an agent: it performs IO along the same transaction
boundaries as changes to its state, so if an effect happens, you know that the
associated state change has happened.

But the best way to think about an agent is as a state machine. Like a state
machine, any input could happen at any time, and it must react coherently to
that input. Output (effects) and the next state of the machine are both pure

> functions of the previous state and the input event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that input. Output (effects) and the next state of the machine are a pure
function of the previous state and the input event.
```
